Chapter 2
Data Center Environment
Today, data centers are essential and inte- KEY CONCEPTS
gral parts of any business, whether small,
Application, DBMS, Host,
medium, or large in size. The core elements
Connectivity, and Storage
of a data center are host, storage, connectivity (or
network), applications, and DBMS that are managed Application Virtualization
centrally. These elements work together to process
File System and Volume
and store data. With the evolution of virtualiza-
Manager
tion, data centers have also evolved from a classic
data center to a virtualized data center (VDC). Compute, Desktop, and Memory
In a VDC, physical resources from a classic data Virtualization
center are pooled together and provided as virtual
Storage Media
resources. This abstraction hides the complexity
and limitation of physical resources from the user. Disk Drive Components
By consolidating IT resources using virtualization,
Zoned Bit Recording
organizations can optimize their infrastructure
utilization and reduce the total cost of owning Logical Block Addressing
an infrastructure. Moreover, in a VDC, virtual
resources are created using software that enables Flash Drives
faster deployment, compared to deploying physical
resources in classic data centers. This chapter covers all the key components of a
data center, including virtualization at compute, memory, desktop, and applica-
tion. Storage and network virtualization is discussed later in the book.
With the increase in the criticality of information assets to businesses, stor-
age — one of the core elements of a data center — is recognized as a distinct
resource. Storage needs special focus and attention for its implementation and
management. This chapter also focuses on storage subsystems and provides
17
cc0022..iinndddd 1177 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1177 PPMM

18 Section I n Storage System
details on components, geometry, and performance parameters of a disk drive.
The connectivity between the host and storage facilitated by various technolo-
gies is also explained.
2.1 Application
An application is a computer program that provides the logic for computing
operations. The application sends requests to the underlying operating system
to perform read/write (R/W) operations on the storage devices. Applications
can be layered on the database, which in turn uses the OS services to perform
R/W operations on the storage devices. Applications deployed in a data center
environment are commonly categorized as business applications, infrastructure
management applications, data protection applications, and security applications.
Some examples of these applications are e-mail, enterprise resource planning
(ERP), decision support system (DSS), resource management, backup, authen-
tication and antivirus applications, and so on.
The characteristics of I/Os (Input/Output) generated by the application infl u-
ence the overall performance of storage system and storage solution designs.
For more information on application I/O characteristics, refer to Appendix A.
APPLICATION VIRTUALIZATION
Applicationvirtualization breaks the dependency between
the application and the underlying platform (OS and hard-
ware). Application virtualization encapsulates the application
and the required OS resources within a virtualized container.
This technology provides the ability to deploy applications
without making any change to the underlying OS, fi le system,
or registry of the computing platform on which they are deployed. Because
virtualized applications run in an isolated environment, the underlying OS and
other applications are protected from potential corruptions. There are many
scenarios in which confl icts might arise if multiple applications or multiple
versions of the same application are installed on the same computing plat-
form. Application virtualization eliminates this confl ict by isolating different
versions of an application and the associated O/S resources.
2.2 Database Management System (DBMS)
A database is a structured way to store data in logically organized tables that
are interrelated. A database helps to optimize the storage and retrieval of data.
A DBMS controls the creation, maintenance, and use of a database. The DBMS
cc0022..iinndddd 1188 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1177 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 19
processes an application’s request for data and instructs the operating system
to transfer the appropriate data from the storage.
2.3 Host (Compute)
Users store and retrieve data through applications. The computers on which these
applications run are referred to as hosts or compute systems. Hosts can be physical
or virtual machines. A compute virtualization software enables creating virtual
machines on top of a physical compute infrastructure. Compute virtualization
and virtual machines are discussed later in this chapter. Examples of physical
hosts include desktop computers, servers or a cluster of servers, laptops, and
mobile devices. A host consists of CPU, memory, I/O devices, and a collection of
software to perform computing operations. This software includes the operat-
ing system, fi le system, logical volume manager, device drivers, and so on. This
software can be installed as separate entities or as part of the operating system.
The CPU consists of four components: Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU), control
unit, registers, and L1 cache. There are two types of memory on a host, Random
Access Memory (RAM) and Read-Only Memory (ROM). I/O devices enable
communication with a host. Examples of I/O devices are keyboard, mouse,
monitor, etc.
Software runs on a host and enables processing of input and output (I/O) data.
The following section details various software components that are essential
parts of a host system.
2.3.1 Operating System
In a traditional computing environment, an operating system controls all aspects
of computing. It works between the application and the physical components
of a compute system. One of the services it provides to the application is data
access. The operating system also monitors and responds to user actions and
the environment. It organizes and controls hardware components and manages
the allocation of hardware resources. It provides basic security for the access
and usage of all managed resources. An operating system also performs basic
storage management tasks while managing other underlying components, such
as the fi le system, volume manager, and device drivers.
In a virtualized compute environment, the virtualization layer works between
the operating system and the hardware resources. Here the OS might work
differently based on the type of compute virtualization implemented. In a typi-
cal implementation, the OS works as a guest and performs only the activities
related to application interaction. In this case, hardware management functions
are handled by the virtualization layer.
cc0022..iinndddd 1199 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1177 PPMM

20 Section I n Storage System
Memory Virtualization
Memory has been, and continues to be, an expensive component of a host. It
determines both the size and number of applications that can run on a host.
Memory virtualization enables multiple applications and processes, whose aggre-
gate memory requirement is greater than the available physical memory, to run
on a host without impacting each other.
Memory virtualization is an operating system feature that virtualizes the
physical memory (RAM) of a host. It creates virtual memory with an address
space larger than the physical memory space present in the compute system.
The virtual memory encompasses the address space of the physical memory and
part of the disk storage. The operating system utility that manages the virtual
memory is known as the virtual memory manager (VMM). The VMM manages
the virtual-to-physical memory mapping and fetches data from the disk stor-
age when a process references a virtual address that points to data at the disk
storage. The space used by the VMM on the disk is known as a swap space. A
swap space (also known as page fi le or swap fi le) is a portion of the disk drive that
appears to be physical memory to the operating system.
In a virtual memory implementation, the memory of a system is divided
into contiguous blocks of fi xed-size pages. A process known as paging moves
inactive physical memory pages onto the swap fi le and brings them back to
the physical memory when required. This enables effi cient use of the available
physical memory among different applications. The operating system typically
moves the least used pages into the swap fi le so that enough RAM is available
for processes that are more active. Access to swap fi le pages is slower than
access to physical memory pages because swap fi le pages are allocated on the
disk drive, which is slower than physical memory.
2.3.2 Device Driver
Adevice driver is special software that permits the operating system to interact
with a specifi c device, such as a printer, a mouse, or a disk drive. A device driver
enables the operating system to recognize the device and to access and control
devices. Device drivers are hardware-dependent and operating-system-specifi c.
2.3.3 Volume Manager
In the early days, disk drives appeared to the operating system as a number
of continuous disk blocks. The entire disk drive would be allocated to the fi le
system or other data entity used by the operating system or application. The
cc0022..iinndddd 2200 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1177 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 21
disadvantage was lack of fl exibility. When a disk drive ran out of space, there
was no easy way to extend the fi le system’s size. Also, as the storage capacity
of the disk drive increased, allocating the entire disk drive for the fi le system
often resulted in underutilization of storage capacity.
The evolution of Logical Volume Managers (LVMs) enabled dynamic extension
of fi le system capacity and effi cient storage management. The LVM is software
that runs on the compute system and manages logical and physical storage.
LVM is an intermediate layer between the fi le system and the physical disk. It
can partition a larger-capacity disk into virtual, smaller-capacity volumes (the
process is called partitioning) or aggregate several smaller disks to form a larger
virtual volume. (The process is called concatenation.) These volumes are then
presented to applications.
Disk partitioning was introduced to improve the fl exibility and utilization of
disk drives. In partitioning, a disk drive is divided into logical containers called
logical volumes (LVs) (see Figure 2-1). For example, a large physical drive can be
partitioned into multiple LVs to maintain data according to the fi le system and
application requirements. The partitions are created from groups of contigu-
ous cylinders when the hard disk is initially set up on the host. The host’s fi le
system accesses the logical volumes without any knowledge of partitioning and
physical structure of the disk.
Hosts
Logical Volume
Physical Volume
Partitioning Concatenation
Figure 2-1: Disk partitioning and concatenation
cc0022..iinndddd 2211 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1177 PPMM

22 Section I n Storage System
Concatenation is the process of grouping several physical drives and present-
ing them to the host as one big logical volume (see Figure 2-1).
The LVM provides optimized storage access and simplifi es storage resource
management. It hides details about the physical disk and the location of data on
the disk. It enables administrators to change the storage allocation even when
the application is running.
The basic LVM components are physical volumes, volume groups, and logical
volumes. In LVM terminology, each physical disk connected to the host system
is a physical volume (PV). The LVM converts the physical storage provided by the
physical volumes to a logical view of storage, which is then used by the operating
system and applications. A volume group is created by grouping together one or
more physical volumes. A unique physical volume identifi er (PVID) is assigned to
each physical volume when it is initialized for use by the LVM. Physical volumes
can be added or removed from a volume group dynamically. They cannot be
shared between different volume groups, which means that the entire physical
volume becomes part of a volume group. Each physical volume is partitioned into
equal-sized data blocks called physical extents when the volume group is created.
Logical volumes are created within a given volume group. A logical volume
can be thought of as a disk partition, whereas the volume group itself can be
thought of as a disk. A volume group can have a number of logical volumes.
The size of a logical volume is based on a multiple of the physical extents.
The logical volume appears as a physical device to the operating system. A
logical volume is made up of noncontiguous physical extents and may span
multiple physical volumes. A fi le system is created on a logical volume. These
logical volumes are then assigned to the application. A logical volume can also
be mirrored to provide enhanced data availability.
2.3.4 File System
Afi le is a collection of related records or data stored as a unit with a name. A
fi le system is a hierarchical structure of fi les. A fi le system enables easy access
to data fi les residing within a disk drive, a disk partition, or a logical volume.
A fi le system consists of logical structures and software routines that control
access to fi les. It provides users with the functionality to create, modify, delete,
and access fi les. Access to fi les on the disks is controlled by the permissions
assigned to the fi le by the owner, which are also maintained by the fi le system.
A fi le system organizes data in a structured hierarchical manner via the use
of directories, which are containers for storing pointers to multiple fi les. All fi le
systems maintain a pointer map to the directories, subdirectories, and fi les that
are part of the fi le system. Examples of common fi le systems are:
cc0022..iinndddd 2222 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1188 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 23
n FAT 32 (File Allocation Table) for Microsoft Windows
n NT File System (NTFS) for Microsoft Windows
n UNIX File System (UFS) for UNIX
n Extended File System (EXT2/3) for Linux
Apart from the fi les and directories, the fi le system also includes a number
of other related records, which are collectively called the metadata. For example,
the metadata in a UNIX environment consists of the superblock, the inodes, and
the list of data blocks free and in use. The metadata of a fi le system must be
consistent for the fi le system to be considered healthy.
A superblock contains important information about the fi le system, such as
the fi le system type, creation and modifi cation dates, size, and layout. It also
contains the count of available resources (such as the number of free blocks,
inodes, and so on) and a fl ag indicating the mount status of the fi le system. An
inode is associated with every fi le and directory and contains information such
as the fi le length, ownership, access privileges, time of last access/modifi cation,
number of links, and the address of the data.
A fi le system block is the smallest “unit” allocated for storing data. Each fi le system
block is a contiguous area on the physical disk. The block size of a fi le system is
fi xed at the time of its creation. The fi le system size depends on the block size and
the total number of fi le system blocks. A fi le can span multiple fi le system blocks
because most fi les are larger than the predefi ned block size of the fi le system. File
system blocks cease to be contiguous and become fragmented when new blocks
are added or deleted. Over time, as fi les grow larger, the fi le system becomes
increasingly fragmented.
The following list shows the process of mapping user fi les to the disk storage
subsystem with an LVM (see Figure 2-2):
1. Files are created and managed by users and applications.
2. These fi les reside in the fi le systems.
3. The fi le systems are mapped to fi le system blocks.
4. The fi le system blocks are mapped to logical extents of a logical volume.
5. These logical extents in turn are mapped to the disk physical extents either
by the operating system or by the LVM.
6. These physical extents are mapped to the disk sectors in a storage subsystem.
If there is no LVM, then there are no logical extents. Without LVM, fi le system
blocks are directly mapped to disk sectors.
cc0022..iinndddd 2233 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1188 PPMM

24  Section   I n Storage System
File System
Blocks
User
|          | Files |           | File System |     |           |     |
| -------- | ----- | --------- | ----------- | --- | --------- | --- |
| 1        |       |           | 2           |     | 3         |     |
| Creates/ |       | Reside in |             |     | Mapped to |     |
Manages
|              |           |     | Disk Physical  |           | LVM Logical  |           |
| ------------ | --------- | --- | -------------- | --------- | ------------ | --------- |
| Disk Sectors |           |     | Extents        |           | Extents      |           |
|              |           | 6   |                |           | 5            | 4         |
|              | Mapped to |     |                | Mapped to |              | Mapped to |
Figure 2-2: Process of mapping user files to disk storage
The fi le system tree starts with the root directory. The root directory has a num-
ber of subdirectories. A fi le system should be mounted before it can be used.
The system utility fsck is run to check fi le system con-
sistency in  UNIX and Linux hosts. An example of the fi le
system in an inconsistent state is when the fi le system has
outstanding changes and the computer system crashes
before the changes are committed to disk. At the time of
booting, the fsck command fi rst checks for consistency of fi le systems for a
successful boot. If the fi le systems are found to be consistent, the command
checks the consistency of all other fi le systems. If any fi le system is found
to be inconsistent, it is not mounted. The inconsistent fi le system might be
repaired automatically by the fsck command or might require user interac-
tion for confi rmation of corrective actions. CHKDSK is the command used on
DOS, OS/2, and Microsoft Windows operating systems.
A fi le system can be either a journaling fi le system or a nonjournaling fi le
system. Nonjournaling fi le systems cause a potential loss of fi les because they use
separate writes to update their data and metadata. If the system crashes during
the write process, the metadata or data might be lost or corrupted. When the
cc0022..iinndddd      2244 44//1199//22001122      1122::0055::1188  PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 25
system reboots, the fi le system attempts to update the metadata structures by
examining and repairing them. This operation takes a long time on large fi le
systems. If there is insuffi cient information to re-create the wanted or original
structure, the fi les might be misplaced or lost, resulting in corrupted fi le systems.
Ajournaling fi le system uses a separate area called a log or journal. This journal
might contain all the data to be written (physical journal) or just the metadata
to be updated (logical journal). Before changes are made to the fi le system,
they are written to this separate area. After the journal has been updated, the
operation on the fi le system can be performed. If the system crashes during
the operation, there is enough information in the log to “replay” the log record
and complete the operation. Journaling results in a quick fi le system check
because it looks only at the active, most recently accessed parts of a large fi le
system. In addition, because information about the pending operation is saved,
the risk of fi les being lost is reduced.
A disadvantage of journaling fi le systems is that they are slower than other
fi le systems. This slowdown is the result of the extra operations that have to
be performed on the journal each time the fi le system is changed. However,
the much shortened time for fi le system checks and the fi le system integrity
provided by journaling far outweighs its disadvantage. Nearly all fi le system
implementations today use journaling.
Dedicated fi le servers may be installed to manage and share a large number
of fi les over a network. These fi le servers support multiple fi le systems and use
fi le-sharing protocols specifi c to the operating system — for example, NFS and
CIFS. These protocols are detailed in Chapter 7.
2.3.5 Compute Virtualization
Compute virtualization is a technique for masking or abstracting the physical
hardware from the operating system. It enables multiple operating systems to run
concurrently on single or clustered physical machines. This technique enables
creating portable virtual compute systems called virtual machines (VMs). Each
VM runs an operating system and application instance in an isolated manner.
Compute virtualization is achieved by a virtualization layer that resides between
the hardware and virtual machines. This layer is also called the hypervisor. The
hypervisor provides hardware resources, such as CPU, memory, and network to all
the virtual machines. Within a physical server, a large number of virtual machines
can be created depending on the hardware capabilities of the physical server.
A virtual machine is a logical entity but appears like a physical host to the
operating system, with its own CPU, memory, network controller, and disks.
However, all VMs share the same underlying physical hardware in an isolated
manner. From a hypervisor perspective, virtual machines are discrete sets of
fi les that include VM confi guration fi le, data fi les, and so on.
cc0022..iinndddd 2255 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1188 PPMM

26 Section I n Storage System
Typically, a physical server often faces resource-confl ict issues when two
or more applications running on the server have confl icting requirements.
For example, applications might need different values in the same registry
entry, different versions of the same DLL, and so on. These issues are further
compounded with an application’s high-availability requirements. As a result,
the servers are limited to serve only one application at a time, as shown in
Figure 2-3 (a). This causes organizations to purchase new physical machines
for every application they deploy, resulting in expensive and infl exible infra-
structure. On the other hand, many applications do not take full advantage of
the hardware capabilities available to them. Consequently, resources such as
processors, memory, and storage remain underutilized. Compute virtualiza-
tion enables users to overcome these challenges (see Figure 2-3 [b]) by allow-
ing multiple operating systems and applications to run on a single physical
machine. This technique signifi cantly improves server utilization and provides
server consolidation.
APP
APP APP APP
OS OS OS
OS VM VM VM
Virtualization Layer (Hypervisor)
Hardware Hardware
CPU Memory NIC Card Hard Disk CPU Memory NIC Card Hard Disk
(a) Before Compute Virtualization (b) After Compute Virtualization
Figure 2-3: Server virtualization
Server consolidation enables organizations to run their data center with fewer
servers. This, in turn, cuts down the cost of new server acquisition, reduces
operational cost, and saves data center fl oor and rack space. Creation of VMs
takes less time compared to a physical server setup; organizations can provi-
sion servers faster and with ease. Individual VMs can be restarted, upgraded,
or even crashed, without affecting the other VMs on the same physical machine.
Moreover, VMs can be copied or moved from one physical machine to another
without causing application downtime. Nondisruptive migration of VMs is
required for load balancing among physical machines, hardware maintenance,
and availability purposes.
cc0022..iinndddd 2266 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::1199 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 27
DESKTOP VIRTUALIZATION
With the traditional desktop, the OS, applications, and user
profi les are all tied to a specifi c piece of hardware. With leg-
acy desktops, business productivity is impacted greatly when
a client device is broken or lost. Desktop virtualization breaks
the dependency between the hardware and its OS, applica-
tions, user profi les, and settings. This enables the IT staff to
change, update, and deploy these elements independently. Desktops hosted
at the data center run on virtual machines; users remotely access these desk-
tops from a variety of client devices, such as laptops, desktops, and mobile
devices (also called Thin devices). Application execution and data storage are
performed centrally at the data center instead of at the client devices. Because
desktops run as virtual machines within an organization’s data center, it miti-
gates the risk of data leakage and theft. It also helps to perform centralized
backup and simplifi es compliance procedures. Virtual desktops are easy to
maintain because it is simple to apply patches, deploy new applications and
OS, and provision or remove users centrally.
2.4 Connectivity
Connectivity refers to the interconnection between hosts or between a host
and peripheral devices, such as printers or storage devices. The discussion
here focuses only on the connectivity between the host and the storage device.
Connectivity and communication between host and storage are enabled using
physical components and interface protocols.
2.4.1 Physical Components of Connectivity
The physical components of connectivity are the hardware elements that connect
the host to storage. Three physical components of connectivity between the host
and storage are the host interface device, port, and cable (Figure 2-4).
Ahost interface device or host adapter connects a host to other hosts and stor-
age devices. Examples of host interface devices are host bus adapter (HBA) and
network interface card (NIC). Host bus adaptor is an application-specifi c integrated
circuit (ASIC) board that performs I/O interface functions between the host and
storage, relieving the CPU from additional I/O processing workload. A host
typically contains multiple HBAs.
Aport is a specialized outlet that enables connectivity between the host and
external devices. An HBA may contain one or more ports to connect the host
cc0022..iinndddd 2277 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2233 PPMM

28 Section I n Storage System
to the storage device. Cables connect hosts to internal or external devices using
copper or fi ber optic media.
Cable
Host
Adapter
Storage
Port
Figure 2-4: Physical components of connectivity
2.4.2 Interface Protocols
A protocol enables communication between the host and storage. Protocols
are implemented using interface devices (or controllers) at both source and
destination. The popular interface protocols used for host to storage com-
munications are Integrated Device Electronics/Advanced Technology Attachment
(IDE/ATA), Small Computer System Interface (SCSI), Fibre Channel (FC) and
Internet Protocol (IP).
IDE/ATA and Serial ATA
IDE/ATA is a popular interface protocol standard used for connecting storage
devices, such as disk drives and CD-ROM drives. This protocol supports paral-
lel transmission and therefore is also known as Parallel ATA (PATA) or simply
ATA. IDE/ATA has a variety of standards and names. The Ultra DMA/133
version of ATA supports a throughput of 133 MB per second. In a master-slave
confi guration, an ATA interface supports two storage devices per connector.
However, if the performance of the drive is important, sharing a port between
two devices is not recommended.
The serial version of this protocol supports single bit serial transmission
and is known as Serial ATA (SATA). High performance and low cost SATA has
largely replaced PATA in newer systems. SATA revision 3.0 provides a data
transfer rate up to 6 Gb/s.
cc0022..iinndddd 2288 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2233 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 29
SCSI and Serial SCSI
SCSI has emerged as a preferred connectivity protocol in high-end computers.
This protocol supports parallel transmission and offers improved performance,
scalability, and compatibility compared to ATA. However, the high cost associ-
ated with SCSI limits its popularity among home or personal desktop users.
Over the years, SCSI has been enhanced and now includes a wide variety of
related technologies and standards. SCSI supports up to 16 devices on a single
bus and provides data transfer rates up to 640 MB/s (for the Ultra-640 version).
Serial attached SCSI (SAS) is a point-to-point serial protocol that provides an
alternative to parallel SCSI. A newer version of serial SCSI (SAS 2.0) supports a
data transfer rate up to 6 Gb/s. This book’s Appendix B provides more details
on the SCSI architecture and interface.
Fibre Channel
Fibre Channel is a widely used protocol for high-speed communication to the
storage device. The Fibre Channel interface provides gigabit network speed. It
provides a serial data transmission that operates over copper wire and optical
fi ber. The latest version of the FC interface (16FC) allows transmission of data up to
16 Gb/s. The FC protocol and its features are covered in more detail in Chapter 5.
Internet Protocol (IP)
IP is a network protocol that has been traditionally used for host-to-host traffi c.
With the emergence of new technologies, an IP network has become a viable
option for host-to-storage communication. IP offers several advantages in terms
of cost and maturity and enables organizations to leverage their existing IP-based
network. iSCSI and FCIP protocols are common examples that leverage IP for
host-to-storage communication. These protocols are detailed in Chapter 6.
2.5 Storage
Storage is a core component in a data center. A storage device uses magnetic,
optic, or solid state media. Disks, tapes, and diskettes use magnetic media,
whereas CD/DVD uses optical media for storage. Removable Flash memory or
Flash drives are examples of solid state media.
In the past, tapes were the most popular storage option for backups because of
their low cost. However, tapes have various limitations in terms of performance
and management, as listed here:
n Data is stored on the tape linearly along the length of the tape. Search
and retrieval of data are done sequentially, and it invariably takes several
cc0022..iinndddd 2299 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2233 PPMM

30 Section I n Storage System
seconds to access the data. As a result, random data access is slow and
time-consuming. This limits tapes as a viable option for applications that
require real-time, rapid access to data.
n In a shared computing environment, data stored on tape cannot be accessed
by multiple applications simultaneously, restricting its use to one appli-
cation at a time.
n On a tape drive, the read/write head touches the tape surface, so the tape
degrades or wears out after repeated use.
n The storage and retrieval requirements of data from the tape and the
overhead associated with managing the tape media are signifi cant.
Due to these limitations and availability of low-cost disk drives, tapes are no
longer a preferred choice as a backup destination for enterprise-class data centers.
Optical disc storage is popular in small, single-user computing environments.
It is frequently used by individuals to store photos or as a backup medium on
personal or laptop computers. It is also used as a distribution medium for small
applications, such as games, or as a means to transfer small amounts of data
from one computer system to another. Optical discs have limited capacity and
speed, which limit the use of optical media as a business data storage solution.
The capability to write once and read many (WORM) is one advantage of opti-
cal disc storage. A CD-ROM is an example of a WORM device. Optical discs, to
some degree, guarantee that the content has not been altered. Therefore, it can be
used as a low-cost alternative for long-term storage of relatively small amounts of
fi xed content that do not change after it is created. Collections of optical discs in
an array, called a jukebox, are still used as a fi xed-content storage solution. Other
forms of optical discs include CD-RW, Blu-ray disc, and other variations of DVD.
Disk drives are the most popular storage medium used in modern computers
for storing and accessing data for performance-intensive, online applications.
Disks support rapid access to random data locations. This means that data can be
written or retrieved quickly for a large number of simultaneous users or applica-
tions. In addition, disks have a large capacity. Disk storage arrays are confi gured
with multiple disks to provide increased capacity and enhanced performance.
Disk drives are accessed through predefi ned protocols,
such as ATA, Serial ATA (SATA), SAS (Serial Attached SCSI),
and FC. These protocols are implemented on the disk inter-
face controllers. Earlier, disk interface controllers were
implemented as separate cards, which were connected to
the motherboard to provide communication with storage devices. Modern disk
interface controllers are integrated with the disk drives; therefore, disk drives
are known by the protocol interface they support, for example SATA disk, FC
disk, and so on.
cc0022..iinndddd 3300 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2233 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 31
2.6 Disk Drive Components
The key components of a hard disk drive are platter, spindle, read-write head,
actuator arm assembly, and controller board (see Figure 2-5).
I/O operations in a HDD are performed by rapidly moving the arm across the
rotating fl at platters coated with magnetic particles. Data is transferred between
the disk controller and magnetic platters through the read-write (R/W) head
which is attached to the arm. Data can be recorded and erased on magnetic
platters any number of times. Following sections detail the different components
of the disk drive, the mechanism for organizing and storing data on disks, and
the factors that affect disk performance.
Platter
Spindle
Actuator
(a)
Actuator Arm Read/Write Head
Controller Board
HDA Interface
(b)
Power
Connector
Figure 2-5: Disk drive components
cc0022..iinndddd 3311 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2244 PPMM

32 Section I n Storage System
2.6.1 Platter
A typical HDD consists of one or more flat circular disks called platters
(Figure 2-6). The data is recorded on these platters in binary codes (0s and 1s).
The set of rotating platters is sealed in a case, called the Head Disk Assembly
(HDA). A platter is a rigid, round disk coated with magnetic material on both
surfaces (top and bottom). The data is encoded by polarizing the magnetic
area, or domains, of the disk surface. Data can be written to or read from both
surfaces of the platter. The number of platters and the storage capacity of each
platter determine the total capacity of the drive.
Spindle
:
:
:
: Platter
:
Figure 2-6: Spindle and platter
2.6.2 Spindle
A spindle connects all the platters (refer to Figure 2-6) and is connected to a
motor. The motor of the spindle rotates with a constant speed.
The disk platter spins at a speed of several thousands of revolutions per minute
(rpm). Common spindle speeds are 5,400 rpm, 7,200 rpm, 10,000 rpm, and 15,000
rpm. The speed of the platter is increasing with improvements in technology,
although the extent to which it can be improved is limited.
2.6.3 Read/Write Head
Read/Write (R/W) heads, as shown in Figure 2-7, read and write data from or
to platters. Drives have two R/W heads per platter, one for each surface of the
platter. The R/W head changes the magnetic polarization on the surface of
the platter when writing data. While reading data, the head detects the magnetic
polarization on the surface of the platter. During reads and writes, the R/W
head senses the magnetic polarization and never touches the surface of the
platter. When the spindle is rotating, there is a microscopic air gap maintained
between the R/W heads and the platters, known as the head fl ying height. This
air gap is removed when the spindle stops rotating and the R/W head rests
on a special area on the platter near the spindle. This area is called the landing
cc0022..iinndddd 3322 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2244 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 33
zone. The landing zone is coated with a lubricant to reduce friction between the
head and the platter.
Spindle
Read/Write Head
Actuator Arm
Figure 2-7: Actuator arm assembly
The logic on the disk drive ensures that heads are moved to the landing
zone before they touch the surface. If the drive malfunctions and the R/W
head accidentally touches the surface of the platter outside the landing zone,
a head crash occurs. In a head crash, the magnetic coating on the platter is
scratched and may cause damage to the R/W head. A head crash generally
results in data loss.
2.6.4 Actuator Arm Assembly
R/W heads are mounted on the actuator arm assembly, which positions the R/W
head at the location on the platter where the data needs to be written or read
(refer to Figure 2-7). The R/W heads for all platters on a drive are attached to
one actuator arm assembly and move across the platters simultaneously.
2.6.5 Drive Controller Board
The controller (refer to Figure 2-5 [b]) is a printed circuit board, mounted at
the bottom of a disk drive. It consists of a microprocessor, internal memory,
circuitry, and fi rmware. The fi rmware controls the power to the spindle motor
and the speed of the motor. It also manages the communication between the
drive and the host. In addition, it controls the R/W operations by moving
the actuator arm and switching between different R/W heads, and performs
the optimization of data access.
cc0022..iinndddd 3333 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2244 PPMM

34 Section I n Storage System
2.6.6 Physical Disk Structure
Data on the disk is recorded on tracks, which are concentric rings on the platter
around the spindle, as shown in Figure 2-8. The tracks are numbered, starting
from zero, from the outer edge of the platter. The number of tracks per inch (TPI)
on the platter (or the track density) measures how tightly the tracks are packed
on a platter.
Each track is divided into smaller units called sectors. A sector is the small-
est, individually addressable unit of storage. The track and sector structure is
written on the platter by the drive manufacturer using a low-level formatting
operation. The number of sectors per track varies according to the drive type.
The fi rst personal computer disks had 17 sectors per track. Recent disks have
a much larger number of sectors on a single track. There can be thousands of
tracks on a platter, depending on the physical dimensions and recording density
of the platter.
Spindle Sector
Track
Cylinder
Figure 2-8: Disk structure: sectors, tracks, and cylinders
Typically, a sector holds 512 bytes of user data, although some disks can be
formatted with larger sector sizes. In addition to user data, a sector also stores
other information, such as the sector number, head number or platter number,
and track number. This information helps the controller to locate the data on
the drive.
A cylinder is a set of identical tracks on both surfaces of each drive platter.
The location of R/W heads is referred to by the cylinder number, not by the
track number.
cc0022..iinndddd 3344 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2255 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 35
DISK ADVERTISED CAPACITY VERSUS AVAILABLE CAPACITY
A difference exists between the advertised capacity of a disk
and the actual space available for data storage. For example,
a disk advertised as 500 GB has only 465.7 GB of user-data
capacity. The reason for this difference is that drive manufac-
turers use a base of 10 for the disk capacity, which means 1
kilobyte is equal to 1,000 bytes instead of 1,024 bytes; there-
fore, the actual available capacity of a disk is always less than the advertised
capacity.
2.6.7 Zoned Bit Recording
Platters are made of concentric tracks; the outer tracks can hold more data than
the inner tracks because the outer tracks are physically longer than the inner
tracks. On older disk drives, the outer tracks had the same number of sectors
as the inner tracks, so data density was low on the outer tracks. This was an
ineffi cient use of the available space, as shown in Figure 2-9 (a).
Zoned bit recording uses the disk effi ciently. As shown in Figure 2-9 (b), this
mechanism groups tracks into zones based on their distance from the center of
the disk. The zones are numbered, with the outermost zone being zone 0. An
appropriate number of sectors per track are assigned to each zone, so a zone
near the center of the platter has fewer sectors per track than a zone on the outer
edge. However, tracks within a particular zone have the same number of sectors.
Sector
221100
Track
(a)PlatterWithoutZones (b)PlatterWithZones
Figure 2-9: Zoned bit recording
The data transfer rate drops while accessing data from
zones closer to the center of the platter. Applications that
demand high performance should have their data on the
outer zones of the platter.
cc0022..iinndddd 3355 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2255 PPMM

36 Section I n Storage System
2.6.8 Logical Block Addressing
Earlier drives used physical addresses consisting of the cylinder, head, and
sector (CHS) number to refer to specifi c locations on the disk, as shown in
Figure 2-10 (a), and the host operating system had to be aware of the geometry
of each disk used. Logical block addressing (LBA), as shown in Figure 2-10 (b),
simplifi es addressing by using a linear address to access physical blocks of
data. The disk controller translates LBA to a CHS address, and the host needs
to know only the size of the disk drive in terms of the number of blocks. The
logical blocks are mapped to physical sectors on a 1:1 basis.
Sector No. 8
Block 0
(Upper Surface)
Head No. 0
Block 32
Cylinder No. 2 (Lower Surface)
Block 64
Block 128
Block 192
Block 255
(a) Physical Address = CHS (b) Logical Block Address = Block#
Figure 2-10: Physical address and logical block address
In Figure 2-10 (b), the drive shows eight sectors per track, eight heads, and
four cylinders. This means a total of 8 × 8 × 4 = 256 blocks, so the block number
ranges from 0 to 255. Each block has its own unique address. Assuming that
the sector holds 512 bytes, a 500 GB drive with a formatted capacity of 465.7 GB
has in excess of 976,000,000 blocks.
2.7 Disk Drive Performance
A disk drive is an electromechanical device that governs the overall perfor-
mance of the storage system environment. The various factors that affect the
performance of disk drives are discussed in this section.
cc0022..iinndddd 3366 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2255 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 37
2.7.1 Disk Service Time
Disk service time is the time taken by a disk to complete an I/O request. Components
that contribute to the service time on a disk drive are seektime,rotationallatency,
and datatransferrate.
Seek Time
The seek time (also called access time) describes the time taken to position the
R/W heads across the platter with a radial movement (moving along the radius
of the platter). In other words, it is the time taken to position and settle the arm
and the head over the correct track. Therefore, the lower the seek time, the faster
the I/O operation. Disk vendors publish the following seek time specifi cations:
n Full Stroke: The time taken by the R/W head to move across the entire
width of the disk, from the innermost track to the outermost track.
n Average: The average time taken by the R/W head to move from one
random track to another, normally listed as the time for one-third of a
full stroke.
n Track-to-Track: The time taken by the R/W head to move between adja-
cent tracks.
Each of these specifi cations is measured in milliseconds. The seek time of a
disk is typically specifi ed by the drive manufacturer. The average seek time on
a modern disk is typically in the range of 3 to 15 milliseconds. Seek time has
more impact on the read operation of random tracks rather than adjacent tracks.
To minimize the seek time, data can be written to only a subset of the available
cylinders. This results in lower usable capacity than the actual capacity of the
drive. For example, a 500 GB disk drive is set up to use only the fi rst 40 percent
of the cylinders and is effectively treated as a 200 GB drive. This is known as
short-stroking the drive.
Rotational Latency
To access data, the actuator arm moves the R/W head over the platter to a par-
ticular track while the platter spins to position the requested sector under the
R/W head. The time taken by the platter to rotate and position the data under
the R/W head is called rotational latency. This latency depends on the rotation
speed of the spindle and is measured in milliseconds. The average rotational
latency is one-half of the time taken for a full rotation. Similar to the seek time,
cc0022..iinndddd 3377 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2266 PPMM

38 Section I n Storage System
rotational latency has more impact on the reading/writing of random sectors
on the disk than on the same operations on adjacent sectors.
Average rotational latency is approximately 5.5 ms for a 5,400-rpm drive,
and around 2.0 ms for a 15,000-rpm (or 250-rps revolution per second) drive as
shown here:
Average rotational latency for a 15,000 rpm (or 250 rps)
drive = 0.5/250 = 2 milliseconds.
Data Transfer Rate
The data transfer rate (also called transfer rate) refers to the average amount of
data per unit time that the drive can deliver to the HBA. It is important to fi rst
understand the process of read/write operations to calculate data transfer rates.
In a read operation, the data fi rst moves from disk platters to R/W heads; then it
moves to the drive’s internal buffer. Finally, data moves from the buffer through
the interface to the host HBA. In a write operation, the data moves from the HBA
to the internal buffer of the disk drive through the drive’s interface. The data
then moves from the buffer to the R/W heads. Finally, it moves from the R/W
heads to the platters.
The data transfer rates during the R/W operations are measured in terms of
internal and external transfer rates, as shown in Figure 2-11.
External transfer rate Internal transfer rate
measured here measured here
Head Disk
HBA Interface Buffer
Assembly
Controller
Disk
Figure 2-11: Data transfer rate
Internal transfer rate is the speed at which data moves from a platter’s surface
to the internal buffer (cache) of the disk. The internal transfer rate takes into
account factors such as the seek time and rotational latency. External transfer rate
is the rate at which data can move through the interface to the HBA. The external
transfer rate is generally the advertised speed of the interface, such as 133 MB/s
for ATA. The sustained external transfer rate is lower than the interface speed.
cc0022..iinndddd 3388 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2266 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 39
2.7.2 Disk I/O Controller Utilization
Utilization of a disk I/O controller has a signifi cant impact on the I/O response
time. To understand this impact, consider that a disk can be viewed as a black
box consisting of two elements:
n Queue: The location where an I/O request waits before it is processed
by the I/O controller
n Disk I/O Controller: Processes I/Os waiting in the queue one by one
The I/O requests arrive at the controller at the rate generated by the application.
This rate is also called the arrival rate. These requests are held in the I/O queue,
and the I/O controller processes them one by one, as shown in Figure 2-12. The
I/O arrival rate, the queue length, and the time taken by the I/O controller to
process each request determines the I/O response time. If the controller is busy or
heavily utilized, the queue size will be large and the response time will be high.
I/O Queue
Arrival
I/O
6 5 4 3 2 1 Processed I/O Request
Controller
Figure 2-12: I/O processing
Based on the fundamental laws of disk drive performance, the relationship
between controller utilization and average response time is given as
Average response time (T ) = Service time (T ) / (1 – Utilization)
R S
where T is the time taken by the controller to serve an I/O.
S
As the utilization reaches 100 percent — that is, as the I/O controller
saturates — the response time is closer to infi nity. In essence, the saturated
component, or the bottleneck, forces the serialization of I/O requests, meaning that
each I/O request must wait for the completion of the I/O requests that preceded
it. Figure 2-13 shows a graph plotted between utilization and response time.
Knee of curve: disks
at about 70%
utilization
Low Queue Size
0% Utilization 70% 100%
Figure 2-13: Utilization versus response time
cc0022..iinndddd 3399 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2266 PPMM

40 Section I n Storage System
The graph indicates that the response time changes are nonlinear as the
utilization increases. When the average queue sizes are low, the response time
remains low. The response time increases slowly with added load on the queue
and increases exponentially when the utilization exceeds 70 percent. Therefore,
for performance-sensitive applications, it is common to utilize disks below their
70 percent of I/O serving capability.
2.8 Host Access to Data
Data is accessed and stored by applications using the underlying infrastructure.
The key components of this infrastructure are the operating system (or fi le
system), connectivity, and storage. The storage device can be internal and (or)
external to the host. In either case, the host controller card accesses the storage
devices using predefi ned protocols, such as IDE/ATA, SCSI, or Fibre Channel
(FC). IDE/ATA and SCSI are popularly used in small and personal computing
environments for accessing internal storage. FC and iSCSI protocols are used
for accessing data from an external storage device (or subsystems). External
storage devices can be connected to the host directly or through the storage
network. When the storage is connected directly to the host, it is referred as
direct-attached storage (DAS), which is detailed later in this chapter.
Understanding access to data over a network is important because it lays
the foundation for storage networking technologies. Data can be accessed over
a network in one of the following ways: block level, fi le level, or object level.
In general, the application requests data from the fi le system (or operating
system) by specifying the fi lename and location. The fi le system maps the fi le
attributes to the logical block address of the data and sends the request to the
storage device. The storage device converts the logical block address (LBA) to a
cylinder-head-sector (CHS) address and fetches the data.
In a block-level access, the fi le system is created on a host, and data is accessed
on a network at the block level, as shown in Figure 2-14 (a). In this case, raw
disks or logical volumes are assigned to the host for creating the fi le system.
In a fi le-level access, the fi le system is created on a separate fi le server or at
the storage side, and the fi le-level request is sent over a network, as shown in
Figure 2-14 (b). Because data is accessed at the fi le level, this method has higher
overhead, as compared to the data accessed at the block level. Object-level access
is an intelligent evolution, whereby data is accessed over a network in terms
of self-contained objects with a unique object identifi er. Details of storage net-
working technologies and deployments are covered in Section II of this book,
“Storage Networking Technologies.”
cc0022..iinndddd 4400 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2266 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 41
Application Application Compute
Compute
File System
File-Level
Network
Request
Block-Level
Request Network
File System
Storage
Storage Storage Storage
(a) Block-Level Access (b) File-Level Access
Figure 2-14: Host access to storage
2.9 Direct-Attached Storage
DAS is an architecture in which storage is connected directly to the hosts. The
internal disk drive of a host and the directly-connected external storage array
are some examples of DAS. Although the implementation of storage networking
technologies is gaining popularity, DAS has remained suitable for localized data
access in a small environment, such as personal computing and workgroups.
DAS is classifi ed as internal or external, based on the location of the storage
device with respect to the host.
In internal DAS architectures, the storage device is internally connected to
the host by a serial or parallel bus (see Figure 2-15 [a]). The physical bus has
distance limitations and can be sustained only over a shorter distance for high-
speed connectivity. In addition, most internal buses can support only a limited
number of devices, and they occupy a large amount of space inside the host,
making maintenance of other components diffi cult.
On the other hand, in external DAS architectures, the host connects directly to
the external storage device, and data is accessed at the block level (see Figure 2-15
[b]). In most cases, communication between the host and the storage device takes
place over a SCSI or FC protocol. Compared to internal DAS, an external DAS
overcomes the distance and device count limitations and provides centralized
management of storage devices.
cc0022..iinndddd 4411 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2277 PPMM

42 Section I n Storage System
Host
(a) Internal DAS
APP APP
OS OS
VM VM
Hypervisor
Hosts
Storage Array
(b) External DAS
Figure 2-15: Internal and external DAS architecture
2.9.1 DAS Benefi ts and Limitations
DAS requires a relatively lower initial investment than storage networking
architectures. The DAS confi guration is simple and can be deployed easily
and rapidly. The setup is managed using host-based tools, such as the host OS,
which makes storage management tasks easy for small environments. Because
cc0022..iinndddd 4422 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::2277 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 43
DAS has a simple architecture, it requires fewer management tasks and less
hardware and software elements to set up and operate.
However, DAS does not scale well. A storage array has a limited number of
ports, which restricts the number of hosts that can directly connect to the storage.
When capacities are reached, the service availability may be compromised. DAS
does not make optimal use of resources due to its limited capability to share
front-end ports. In DAS environments, unused resources cannot be easily re-
allocated, resulting in islands of over-utilized and under-utilized storage pools.
2.10 Storage Design Based on Application
Requirements and Disk Performance
Determining storage requirements for an application begins with determining
the required storage capacity. This is easily estimated by the size and number of
fi le systems and database components used by applications. The I/O size, I/O
characteristics, and the number of I/Os generated by the application at peak
workload are other factors that affect disk performance, I/O response time, and
design of storage systems. The I/O block size depends on the fi le system and the
database on which the application is built. Block size in a database environment
is controlled by the underlying database engine and the environment variables.
The disk service time (T ) for an I/O is a key measure of disk performance;
S
T , along with disk utilization rate (U), determines the I/O response time for an
S
application. As discussed earlier in this chapter, the total disk service time (T ) is
S
the sum of the seek time (T), rotational latency (L), and internal transfer time (X):
T = T + L + X
S
Consider an example with the following specifi cations provided for a disk:
n The average seek time is 5 ms in a random I/O environment; therefore,
T = 5 ms.
n Disk rotation speed of 15,000 revolutions per minute or 250 revolutions per
second — from which rotational latency (L) can be determined, which is
one-half of the time taken for a full rotation or L = (0.5/250 rps expressed
in ms).
n 40 MB/s internal data transfer rate, from which the internal transfer time
(X) is derived based on the block size of the I/O — for example, an I/O
with a block size of 32 KB; therefore X = 32 KB/40 MB.
Consequently, the time taken by the I/O controller to serve an I/O of block
size 32 KB is (T ) = 5 ms + (0.5/250) + 32 KB/40 MB = 7.8 ms.
S
Therefore, the maximum number of I/Os serviced per second or IOPS is
(1/T ) = 1/(7.8 × 10
-3)
= 128 IOPS.
S
cc0022..iinndddd 4433 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::3300 PPMM

44 Section I n Storage System
Table 2-1 lists the maximum IOPS that can be serviced for different block sizes
using the previous disk specifi cations.
Table 2-1: IOPS Performed by Disk Drive
BLOCK
SIZE T = T +L + X IOPS = 1/T
S S
4 KB 5 ms + (0.5/250 rps) + 4 K/40 MB = 5 + 2 + 0.1 = 7.1 140
8 KB 5 ms + (0.5/250 rps) + 8 K/40 MB = 5 + 2 + 0.2 = 7.2 139
16 KB 5 ms + (0.5/250 rps) + 16 K/40 MB = 5 + 2 + 0.4 = 7.4 135
32 KB 5 ms + (0.5/250 rps) + 32 K/40 MB = 5 + 2 + 0.8 = 7.8 128
64 KB 5 ms + (0.5/250 rps) + 64 K/40 MB = 5 + 2 + 1.6 = 8.6 116
The IOPS ranging from 116 to 140 for different block sizes represents the IOPS
that can be achieved at potentially high levels of utilization (close to 100 per-
cent). As discussed in Section 2.7.2, the application response time, R, increases
with an increase in disk controller utilization. For the same preceding example,
the response time (R) for an I/O with a block size of 32 KB at 96 percent disk
controller utilization is
R = T /(1 – U) = 7.8/(1 – 0.96) = 195 ms
S
If the application demands a faster response time, then the utilization for
the disks should be maintained below 70 percent. For the same 32-KB block
size, at 70-percent disk utilization, the response time reduces drastically to 26
ms. However, at lower disk utilization, the number of IOPS a disk can perform
is also reduced. In the case of a 32-KB block size, a disk can perform 128 IOPS
at almost 100 percent utilization, whereas the number of IOPS it can perform
at 70-percent utilization is 89 (128 x 0.7). This indicates that the number of
I/Os a disk can perform is an important factor that needs to be considered while
designing the storage requirement for an application.
Therefore, the storage requirement for an application is determined in terms
of both the capacity and IOPS. If an application needs 200 GB of disk space,
then this capacity can be provided simply with a single disk. However, if the
application IOPS requirement is high, then it results in performance degrada-
tion because just a single disk might not provide the required response time
for I/O operations.
Based on this discussion, the total number of disks required (D ) for an
R
application is computed as follows:
D = Max (D , D)
R C I
cc0022..iinndddd 4444 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::3300 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 45
Where D is the number of disks required to meet the capacity, and D is
C I
the number of disks required to meet the application IOPS requirement. Let’s
understand this with the help of an example.
Consider an example in which the capacity requirement for an application is
1.46 TB. The number of IOPS generated by the application at peak workload is
estimated at 9,000 IOPS. The vendor specifi es that a 146-GB, 15,000-rpm drive
is capable of doing a maximum 180 IOPS.
In this example, the number of disks required to meet the capacity require-
ments will be 1.46 TB/146 GB = 10 disks.
To meet the application IOPS requirements, the number of disks required
is 9,000/180 = 50. However, if the application is response-time sensitive, the
number of IOPS a disk drive can perform should be calculated based on 70-
percent disk utilization. Considering this, the number of IOPS a disk can per-
form at 70 percent utilization is 180 ¥ 0.7 = 126 IOPS. Therefore, the number of
disks required to meet the application IOPS requirement will be 9,000/126 = 72.
As a result, the number of disks required to meet the application requirements
will be Max (10, 72) = 72 disks.
The preceding example indicates that from a capacity-perspective, 10 disks are
suffi cient; however, the number of disks required to meet application performance
is 72. To optimize disk requirements from a performance perspective, various
solutions are deployed in a real-time environment. Examples of these solutions
are disk native command queuing, use of fl ash drives, RAID, and the use of
cache memory. RAID and cache are detailed in Chapters 3 and 4 respectively.
2.11 Disk Native Command Queuing
Command queuing is a technique implemented on modern disk drives that
determines the execution order of received I/Os and reduces unnecessary
drive-head movements to improve disk performance. When an I/O is received
for execution at the disk controller, the command queuing algorithms assign a
tag that defi nes a sequence in which the commands should be executed. With
command queuing, commands are executed based on the organization of data
on the disk, regardless of the order in which the commands are received.
The commonly used algorithm for command queuing is seek time optimization.
Commands are executed based on optimizing read/write head movements,
which might result in the reordering of commands. Without seek time optimiza-
tion, the commands are executed in the order they are received. For example, as
shown in Figure 2-16 (a), the commands are executed in the order A, B, C, and
D. The radial movement required by the head to execute C immediately after A
is less than what would be required to execute B. With seek time optimization,
cc0022..iinndddd 4455 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::3300 PPMM

46 Section I n Storage System
the command execution sequence would be A, C, B, and D, as shown in
Figure 2-16 (b).
A
D C B A Disk Controller D C B A
C
I/O Requests I/O
Processing Order D
B
Cylinders
(a) Without Optimization
A
D C B A Disk Controller D B C A
C
I/O Requests I/O
Processing Order D
B
Cylinders
(b) With Seek Time Optimization
Figure 2-16: Disk command queuing
Access Time Optimization is another command queuing algorithm. With this
algorithm, commands are executed based on the combination of seek time
optimization and an analysis of rotational latency for optimal performance.
Command queuing is also implemented on modern storage array control-
lers, which might further supplement the command queuing implemented on
the disk drive.
2.12 Introduction to Flash Drives
With the growth of information, storage users continue to demand ever-increasing
performance requirements for their business applications. Traditionally, high I/O
requirements were met by simply using more disks. Availability of enterprise
class fl ash drives (EFD) has changed the scenario.
Flash drives, also referred as solid state drives (SSDs), are new generation
drives that deliver ultra-high performance required by performance-sensitive
cc0022..iinndddd 4466 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::3300 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 47
applications. Flash drives use semiconductor-based solid state memory (fl ash
memory) to store and retrieve data. Unlike conventional mechanical disk drives,
fl ash drives contain no moving parts; therefore, they do not have seek and
rotational latencies. Flash drives deliver a high number of IOPS with very low
response times. Also, being a semiconductor-based device, fl ash drives con-
sume less power, compared to mechanical drives. Flash drives are especially
suited for applications with small block size and random-read workloads that
require consistently low (less than 1 millisecond) response times. Applications
that need to process massive amounts of information quickly, such as currency
exchange, electronic trading systems, and real-time data feed processing benefi t
from fl ash drives.
Compared to conventional mechanical disk drives, EFD provides up to 30
times the throughput and up to one-tenth the response time (<1 ms compared
with 6-10 ms). In addition, fl ash drives can store data using up to 38 percent less
energy per TB than traditional disk drives, which translates into approximately
98 percent less power consumption per I/O.
Overall, fl ash drives provide better total cost of ownership (TCO) even
though they cost more on $/GB basis. By implementing fl ash drives, busi-
nesses can meet application performance requirements with far fewer drives
(approximately 20 to 30 times less number of drives compared to conventional
mechanical drives). This reduction not only provides savings in terms of drive
cost, but also translates to savings for power, cooling, and space consumption.
Fewer numbers of drives in the environment also means less cost for manag-
ing the storage.
2.12.1 Components and Architecture of Flash Drives
Flash drives use similar physical form factor and connectors as mechanical disk
drives to maintain compatibility. This enables easy replacement of a mechanical
disk drive with a fl ash drive in a storage array enclosure. The key components of
a fl ash drive are the controller, I/O interface, mass storage (collection of memory
chips), and cache. The controller manages the functioning of the drive, and
the I/O interface provides power and data access. Mass storage is an array of
nonvolatile NAND (negated AND) memory chips used for storing data. Cache
serves as a temporary space or buffer for data transaction and operations.
A fl ash drive uses multiple parallel I/O channels (from its drive controller
to the fl ash memory chips) for data access. Generally, the larger the number of
fl ash memory chips and channels, the higher the drive’s internal bandwidth,
and ultimately the higher the drive’s performance. Flash drives typically have
eight to 24 channels.
Memory chips in fl ash drives are logically organized in blocks and pages.
Apage is the smallest object that can be read or written on a fl ash drive. Pages
are grouped together into blocks. (These blocks should not be confused with
cc0022..iinndddd 4477 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::3311 PPMM

48 Section I n Storage System
the 512-byte blocks in mechanical disk drive sectors.) A block may have 32, 64,
or 128 pages. Pages do not have a standard size; typical page sizes are 4 KB,
8 KB, and 16 KB. Because fl ash drives emulate mechanical drives that use logical
block addresses (LBAs), a page spans across a consecutive series of data blocks.
For example, a 4-KB page would span across eight 512-byte data blocks with
consecutive addresses. In fl ash drives, a read operation can happen at the page
level, whereas a write or an erase operation happens only at the block level.
2.12.2 Features of Enterprise Flash Drives
The key features of enterprise class fl ash drives are as follows:
n NAND fl ash memory technology: NAND memory technology is well
suited for accessing random data. A NAND device uses bad block tracking
and error-correcting code (ECC) to maintain data integrity and provide
the fastest write speeds.
n Single-Level Cell (SLC)-based fl ash: NAND technology is available in
two different cell designs. A multi-level cell (MLC) stores more than one
bit per cell by virtue of its capability to register multiple states, versus a
single-level cell that can store only 1 bit. SLC is the preferred technology
for enterprise data applications due to its performance and longevity.
SLC read speeds are typically rated at twice those of MLC devices, and
write speeds are up to four times higher. SLC devices typically have 10
times higher write erase cycles, compared to MLC designs. In addition,
the SLC fl ash memory has higher reliability because it stores only 1 bit
per cell. Hence, the likelihood for error is reduced.
n Write leveling technique: An important element of maximizing a fl ash
drive’s useful life is ensuring that the individual memory cells experi-
ence uniform use. This means that data that is frequently updated is
written to different locations to avoid rewriting the same cells. In EFDs,
the device is designed to ensure that with any new write operation, the
youngest block is used.
2.13 Concept in Practice: VMware ESXi
VMware is the leading provider for a server virtualization solution. VMware
ESXi provides a platform called hypervisor. The hypervisor abstracts CPU,
memory, and storage resources to run multiple virtual machines concurrently
on the same physical server.
VMware ESXi is a hypervisor that installs on x86 hardware to enable server
virtualization. It enables creating multiple virtual machines (VMs) that can run
cc0022..iinndddd 4488 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::3311 PPMM

Chapter 2 n Data Center Environment 49
simultaneously on the same physical machine. A VM is a discrete set of fi les that
can be moved, copied, and used as a template. All the fi les that make up a VM
are typically stored in a single directory on a cluster fi le system called Virtual
Machine File System (VMFS). The physical machine that houses ESXi is called
the ESXi host. ESXi hosts provide physical resources used to run virtual machines.
ESXi has two key components: VMkernel and Virtual Machine Monitor.
VMkernel provides functionality similar to that found in other operating
systems, such as process creation, fi le system management, and process sched-
uling. It is designed to specifi cally support running multiple VMs and provide
core functionality such as resource scheduling, I/O stacks, and so on.
The virtual machine monitor is responsible for executing commands on the
CPUs and performing Binary Translation (BT). A virtual machine monitor per-
forms hardware abstraction to appear as a physical machine with its own CPU,
memory, and I/O devices. Each VM is assigned a virtual machine monitor that
has a share of the CPU, memory, and I/O devices to successfully run the VM.
Summary
This chapter detailed the key elements of a data center environment — applica-
tion, DBMS, host, connectivity, and storage. The data fl ows from an application
to storage through these elements. Physical and logical components of these
entities affect the overall performance of the application. Virtualization at differ-
ent components of the data center provides better utilization and management
of these components.
Storage is a core component in the data center environment. The disk drive
is the most popular storage device that uses magnetic media for accessing
and storing data. Flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs) are a recent innovation, and
in many ways, superior to mechanical disk drives.
Modern disk storage systems use hundreds of disks to meet application per-
formance requirements. Managing the capacity, performance, and reliability of
these large numbers of disks poses signifi cant challenges. RAID (redundant array
of independent disk), as detailed in the next chapter, is an enabling technology
to manage capacity, performance, and reliability of disk drives.
cc0022..iinndddd 4499 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::3311 PPMM

50 Section I n Storage System
EXERCISES
1. What are the advantages of a virtualized data center over a classic data
center?
2. An application specifies a requirement of 200 GB to host a database and
other files. It also specifies that the storage environment should support
5,000 IOPS during its peak workloads. The disks available for configuration
provide 66 GB of usable capacity, and the manufacturer specifies that they
can support a maximum of 140 IOPS. The application is response time-
sensitive, and disk utilization beyond 60 percent does not meet the
response time requirements. Compute and explain the theoretical basis
for the minimum number of disks that should be configured to meet the
requirements of the application.
3. Which components constitute the disk service time? Which component
contributes the largest percentage of the disk service time in a random
I/O operation?
4. The average I/O size of an application is 64 KB. The following specifica-
tions are available from the disk manufacturer: average seek time = 5 ms,
7,200 RPM, and transfer rate = 40 MB/s. Determine the maximum IOPS
that could be performed with this disk for the application. Using this case
as an example, explain the relationship between disk utilization and IOPS.
5. Refer to Question 4. Based on the calculated disk service time, plot a
graph showing the response time versus utilization, considering the
utilization of the I/O controller at 20 percent, 40 percent, 60 percent,
80 percent, and 100 percent. Describe the conclusion that could be
derived from the graph.
6. Research other elements of a data center besides the core elements
discussed in this chapter, including environmental control parameters
such as HVAC (heat, ventilation, and air-condition), power supplies, and
security.
cc0022..iinndddd 5500 44//1199//22001122 1122::0055::3311 PPMM

Chapter 3
Data Protection: RAID
In the late 1980s, rapid adoption of computers KEY CONCEPTS
for business processes stimulated the growth
of new applications and databases, signifi - Hardware and Software RAID
cantly increasing the demand for storage capacity
Striping, Mirroring, and Parity
and performance. At that time, data was stored on
a single large, expensive disk drive called Single RAID Levels
Large Expensive Drive (SLED). Use of single disks
RAID Write Penalty
could not meet the required performance levels
because they were capable of serving only a lim- Hot Spares
ited number of I/Os.
Today’s data centers house hundreds of disk drives in their storage infra-
structure. Disk drives are inherently susceptible to failures due to mechanical
wear and tear and other environmental factors, which could result in data
loss. The greater the number of disk drives in a storage array, the greater the
probability of a disk failure in the array. For example, consider a storage array
of 100 disk drives, each with an average life expectancy of 750,000 hours. The
average life expectancy of this collection in the array, therefore, is 750,000/100
or 7,500 hours. This means that a disk drive in this array is likely to fail at least
once in 7,500 hours.
RAID is an enabling technology that leverages multiple drives as part of a
set that provides data protection against drive failures. In general, RAID imple-
mentations also improve the storage system performance by serving I/Os from
multiple disks simultaneously. Modern arrays with fl ash drives also benefi t in
terms of protection and performance by using RAID.
In 1987, Patterson, Gibson, and Katz at the University of California, Berkeley,
published a paper titled “A Case for Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks
51
cc0033..iinndddd 5511 44//1199//22001122 1122::0044::4433 PPMM

52 Section I n Storage System
(RAID).” This paper described the use of small-capacity, inexpensive disk drives
as an alternative to large-capacity drives common on mainframe computers. The
term RAID has been redefi ned to refer to independent disks to refl ect advances
in the storage technology. RAID technology has now grown from an academic
concept to an industry standard and is common implementation in today’s
storage arrays.
This chapter details RAID technology, RAID levels, and different types of
RAID implementations and their benefi ts.
3.1 RAID Implementation Methods
The two methods of RAID implementation are hardware and software. Both
have their advantages and disadvantages, and are discussed in this section.
3.1.1 Software RAID
Software RAID uses host-based software to provide RAID functions. It is imple-
mented at the operating-system level and does not use a dedicated hardware
controller to manage the RAID array.
Software RAID implementations offer cost and simplicity benefi ts when
compared with hardware RAID. However, they have the following limitations:
n Performance: Software RAID affects overall system performance. This
is due to additional CPU cycles required to perform RAID calculations.
n Supported features: Software RAID does not support all RAID levels.
n Operating system compatibility: Software RAID is tied to the host operat-
ing system; hence, upgrades to software RAID or to the operating system
should be validated for compatibility. This leads to infl exibility in the
data-processing environment.
3.1.2 Hardware RAID
In hardware RAID implementations, a specialized hardware controller is imple-
mented either on the host or on the array.
Controller card RAID is a host-based hardware RAID implementation in which
a specialized RAID controller is installed in the host, and disk drives are con-
nected to it. Manufacturers also integrate RAID controllers on motherboards. A
host-based RAID controller is not an effi cient solution in a data center environ-
ment with a large number of hosts.
The external RAID controller is an array-based hardware RAID. It acts as an
interface between the host and disks. It presents storage volumes to the host,
cc0033..iinndddd 5522 44//1199//22001122 1122::0044::4433 PPMM